Update Airbyte Protocol Docs (#13709)
airbytehq/airbyte: docs/understanding-airbyte/airbyte-protocol.md

### Common Interface Methods
The following part of the interface is identical across all actors:
```
spec() -> ConnectorSpecification
check(Config) -> AirbyteConnectionStatus
```

These methods are described in their respective sections ([spec](#spec), [check](#check)).

### Interface Invariants

The output of each method in actor interface is wrapped in an `AirbyteMessage`. This struct is an envelope for the return value of any message in the described interface. See the section the [AirbyteMessage](#airbytemessage) section below for more details. For the sake of brevity, interface diagrams will elide these `AirbyteMessage`s.

Additionally, all methods described in the protocol can emit `AirbyteLogMessage`s and `AirbyteTraceMessage`s (for more details see [Logging](#airbytelogmessage)). These messages allow an actor to emit logs and other informational metadata. All subsequent method signatures will assume that any number of messages of these types (wrapped in the `AirbyteMessage`) may be emitted.

Each method in the protocol has 3 parts:
1. **Input**: these are the arguments passed to the method.

> 2. **Data Channel Egress (Output)**: all outputs from a method are via STDOUT. While some method signatures declare a single return value, in practice, any number of `AirbyteLogMessage`s and `AirbyteTraceMessage`s may be emitted. An actor is responsible for closing STDOUT to declare that it is done.

Reviewer: ... No connector should emit any data on STDERR.

Author: i don't follow this comment. is the clarification that STDERR is only ever used for error logs? everything else happens on STDOUT?

Author: added a line about this in the `Additional Invariants` section

#### Input:
1. `config` - A configuration JSON object that has been validated using `ConnectorSpecification#connectionSpecification` (see [ActorSpecification](#actor-specification) for information on `connectionSpecification`).
2. `configured catalog` - A `ConfiguredAirbyteCatalog` is built on top of the `catalog` returned by `discover`. The `ConfiguredAirbyteCatalog` specifies HOW the data in the catalog should be replicated. The catalog is documented in the [Catalog Section](#catalog).
3. `state` - An JSON object that represents a checkpoint in the replication. This object is only ever written or read by the source, so it is a JSON blob with whatever information is necessary to keep track of how much of the data source has already been read (learn more in the [State & Checkpointing](#state--checkpointing) Section).

#### Output:
1. `message stream` - A stream of `AirbyteRecordMessage`s and `AirbyteStateMessage`s piped to stdout.
   * A source outputs `AirbyteStateMessages` in order to allow checkpointing data replication. State is described in more detail below in the [State & Checkpointing](#state--checkpointing) section.

>    * Only `AirbyteRecordMessage`s that contain streams that are in the catalog will be processed. Those that do not will be ignored. See [Schema Mismatches](#schema-mismatches) for more details.

Reviewer: ... `AirbyteRecordMessage`s from multiple streams can be multiplexed/mixed together, and do not need to be emitted serially as a group.

Author: :+1:

```

For the sake of brevity, we will not re-describe `spec` and `check`. They are exactly the same as those commands described for the Source.

#### Write

#### Input:
1. `config` - A configuration JSON object that has been validated using the `ConnectorSpecification`.
2. `catalog` - An `AirbyteCatalog`. This `catalog` should be a subset of the `catalog` returned by the `discover` command. Any `AirbyteRecordMessages`s that the destination receives that do _not_ match the structure described in the `catalog` will fail.
3. `message stream` - \(this stream is consumed on stdin--it is not passed as an arg\). It will receive a stream of JSON-serialized `AirbyteMesssage`.

#### Output:
1. `message stream` - A stream of `AirbyteStateMessage`s piped to stdout. The destination connector should only output state messages if they were previously received as input on stdin. Outputting a state message indicates that all records which came before it have been successfully written to the destination.

* The destination should read in the `AirbyteMessages` and write any that are of type `AirbyteRecordMessage` to the underlying data store.

> * The destination should fail if any of the messages it receives do not match the structure described in the `catalog`.

Reviewer: I know that this document abstracts our platform/worker, but making this the job of the destination seems odd.   Maybe:

> Implementations of this spec will likely want to move messages filtering and validation upstream of the destination itself

Author: 👍

The specification allows the Actor to share information about itself.

The `connectionSpecification` is JSONSchema that describes what information needs to the actor for it operate. e.g. If using a Postgres Source, the `ConnectorSpecification` would specify that a `hostname`, `port`, and `password` are required in order for the connector to function. This JSONSchema can be used to validate that the provided inputs are valid. e.g. If `port` is one of the fields and the JsonSchema in the `connectionSpecification` specifies that this field should be a number, if a user inputs "airbyte", they will receive an error. For connection specification, Airbyte adheres to JsonSchema validation rules. The Airbyte implementation of the Protocol is able to render this JSONSchema to produce a form for users to fill in the information for an Actor.

The specification also contains information about what features the Actor supports.
* `supported_destination_sync_modes` - describes which sync modes a destination is able to support. See [Sync Modes](#source-sync-modes).

`documentationUrl` and `changelogUrl` are optional fields that link to additional information about the connector.

> The following are fields that still exist in the specification but are slated to be removed as they are leak choices about how Airbyte implements the protocol as opposed to being strictly necessary part of the protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following are fields that still exist in the specification but are slated to be removed as they leak choices about how Airbyte implements the protocol as opposed to being strictly necessary part of the protocol.
```

* `supportsIncremental` is deprecated and can be ignored. It is vestigial from when full refresh / incremental was specified at the Actor level.
* `supportsNormalization` determines whether the Destination supports Basic Normalization
* `supportsDBT` - determines whether the Destination supports Basic Normalization
* `authSpecification` and `advanced_auth` will be removed from the protocol and as such are not documented. Information on their use can be found here.

```yaml

>   ConnectorSpecification:

Reviewer: Iframes in the docs??

>   ConnectorSpecification:

Author: We change the protocol infrequently. I would certainly prefer an automated way of extracting the protocol into these docs, but I think it is tolerable to just say as part of a protocol change you have to update the docs. As one of the reviewers I'm willing to be the hall monitor on this. If anyone has a great automated option they think we should use though, I'm all ears.

>   ConnectorSpecification:

Reviewer 2: @cgardens and I talked about this offline.  My thoughts are to eventually use something like [asciidoc](https://asciidoc.org/) which allows for inclusion of snippets/external files in the rendered text.  However, as @cgardens points out, we change it infrequently enough that perhaps this is a future improvement if we find it getting out of sync frequently.

    description: Specification of a connector (source/destination)
    type: object
    required:
      - connectionSpecification
    additionalProperties: true
    properties:
      # todo - split ConnectorSpecification into general vs connector type sections of properties
      # General Properties (Common to all connectors)
      # todo (cgardens) - prefer snake case for field names.
      documentationUrl:
        type: string
        format: uri
      # todo (cgardens) - prefer snake case for field names.
      changelogUrl:
        type: string
        format: uri

>       # todo (cgardens) - prefer snake case for field names.

Author: :+1:

      "json_schema": {
        "type": "object",
        "required": ["name"],
        "properties": {
          "name": {
            "type": "string"
          }
        }
      }
    },
    {
      "name": "products",
      "json_schema": {
        "type": "object",
        "required": ["name", "features"],
        "properties": {
          "name": {
            "type": "string"
          },
          "features": {
            "type": "array",
            "items": {
              "type": "object",
              "required": ["name", "productId"],
              "properties": {
                "name": { "type": "string" },
                "productId": { "type": "number" }
              }
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

**Note:** Stream and field names can be any UTF8 string. Destinations are responsible for cleaning these names to make them valid table and column names in their respective data stores.

## Namespace
Technical systems often group their underlying data into namespaces with each namespace's data isolated from another namespace. This isolation allows for better organisation and flexibility, leading to better usability.

> An example of a namespace is the RDMS's `schema` concept. Some common use cases for schemas are enforcing permissions, segregating test and production data and general data organisation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An example of a namespace is the RDMS's `schema` concept. An API namespace might be used for multiple accounts (e.g. `company_a` vs `company_b`, each having a "users" and "purchases" stream).  Some common use cases for schemas are enforcing permissions, segregating test and production data and general data organization.
```

The `AirbyteStream` represents this concept through an optional field called `namespace`. Additional documentation on Namespaces can be found [here](#namespace).

## Cursor

* The cursor is how sources track which records are new or updated since the last sync.
* A "cursor field" is the field that is used as a comparable for making this determination.
    * If a configuration requires a cursor field, it requires an array of strings that serves as a path to the desired field. e.g. if the structure of a stream is `{ value: 2, metadata: { updated_at: 2020-11-01 } }` the `default_cursor_field` might be `["metadata", "updated_at"]`.

## AirbyteStream

> This section will document the meaning of each field in an `AirbyteStream`

Reviewer 3: It feels like these should be comments directly on the definition of `AirbyteStream` embedded here. It seems like an antipattern to keep the explanation of fields separate from its actual YAML code defiition

Author: agreed. i think that'll be the next iteration.

* `sync_mode` - The sync mode that will be used to by the source to sync that stream. The value in this field MUST be present in the `supported_sync_modes` array for the discovered `AirbyteStream` of this stream.
* `cursor_field` - This field is an array of keys to a field in the schema that in the `INCREMENTAL` sync mode will be used to determine if a record is new or updated since the last sync.
    * If an `AirbyteStream` has `source_defined_cursor` set to `true`, then the `cursor_field` attribute in `ConfiguredAirbyteStream` will be ignored.
    * If an `AirbyteStream` defines a `default_cursor_field`, then the `cursor_field` attribute in `ConfiguredAirbyteStream` is not required, but if it is set, it will override the default value.
    * If an `AirbyteStream` does not define a `cursor_field` or a `default_cursor_field`, then `ConfiguredAirbyteStream` must define a `cursor_field`.
* `destination_sync_mode` - The sync mode that will be used the destination to sync that stream. The value in this field MUST be present in the `supported_destination_sync_modes` array in the specification for the Destination.

> ### Source Sync Modes

Author: i don't understand.

* Illegal - If `source_defined_cursor`, `cursor_field`, and `default_cursor_field` are all false-y, this is an invalid configuration.

## Schema Mismatches

Over time, it is possible for the catalog to become out of sync with the underlying data store it represents. The Protocol is design to be resilient to this. In should never fail due to a mismatch.

|Scenario|Outcome|
|---|---|
|Stream exists in catalog but not in data store|When the source runs, it will not find the data for that stream. All other streams sync as usual.|
|Stream exists in data store but not in catalog|When the source runs, it never looks for the data in the store related to that stream and thus does not emit it.
|Field exists in catalog but not in data store|If the column for a table is remove in the underlying data store the Source will not find it and will not replicate it. It should not cause a failure. The data simply will not be there.|
|Field exists in data store but not in catalog|When the source runs, it never looks for the field in the store. It should not emit that field. If it does, it should be ignored downstream. The existence of an unknown field should not cause a failure.|

> In short, if the catalog is ever out of sync with the schema of the underlying data store, it should never block replication for data that is present.

Reviewer: Above we say the following, which I don't think matches the intent of this section.

> The destination should fail if any of the messages it receives do not match the structure described in the `catalog`.

Should the destination `exit 1` or ignore messages that are out-of-sync with the spec?

Author: good call out. ignore.

Author: updated above:
> * The destination should ignore fields or streams that are out of sync with the `catalog`. The destination should always make its best effort to load what data is there that does match that catalog. e.g. if the User Stream has the fields first_name and last_name in the catalog, but the record has first_name and eye_color, the destination should persist first_name, even though last_name is missing. It should ignore eye_color as extraneous.

Reviewer 3: is this section specifically referring to sources?

State also enables Partial Success. In the case where during a sync there is a failure before all data has been extracted and committed, if all records up to a certain state are committed, then the next time the sync happens, it can start from that state as opposed to going back to the beginning. Partial Success is powerful, because especially in the case of high data volumes and long syncs, being able to pick up from wherever the failure occurred can costly re-syncing of data that has already been replicated.

## State & Source
This section will step through how state is used to allow a Source to pick up where it left off. A Source takes state as an input. A Source should be able to take that input and use it to determine where it left off the last time. The contents of the Source is a black box to the Protocol. The Protocol provides an envelope for the Source to put its state in and then passes the state back in that envelope. The Protocol never needs to know anything about the contents of the state. Thus, the Source can track state however makes most sense to it.

Here is an example of the lifecycle of state in reference to the Source.

> ![](../.gitbook/assets/source-state-example.png)

Reviewer: I like the images, specifically docs/.gitbook/assets/source-state-example.png!  Could you add a note on the arrow pointing to the next sync that shows that time has passed, and the drew row in now there, e.g.:  "pass last state to next sync - new rows since previous sync".  This is clear in the text content, but if this image is shared without the doc, it could be more clear.

Author: great! added.

* **Global** represents Sources where this shared state across streams. In these cases each state message contains the whole state for the connection. The `shared_state` field is where any information that is shared across streams must go. The `stream_states` field contains a list of objects that contain a Stream Descriptor and the state information for that stream that is stream-specific. There are drawbacks to this state type, so it should only be used in cases where a shared state between streams is unavoidable.
* **Legacy** exists for backwards compatibility. In this state type, the state object is totally a black box. The only inference tha can be drawn from the state object is that if it is null, then there is no state for the entire Source. All current legacy cases can be ported to stream or global. Once they are, it will be removed.

This table breaks down attributes of these state types.

| |Stream|Global|Legacy|
|---|---|---|---|

> |Protocol Version|2|2|1,2|

Author: i'm going to remove them for now entirely since we're not ready to commit to versions. but yes when we re-add, i agree.
